There's a great experiment where rats
were given a lever to press for cocaine
and after learning that it releases a
lot of dopamine, the rats will [music]
press that lever till exhaustion or
death, which is essentially the model of
addiction that we see in humans. But if
the cocaine is then removed, eventually
they won't press [music] the lever
anymore. Now, if that same rat after a
period of time is then exposed to a very
painful foot shock, the first thing the
rat will do is run over and start
pressing that lever again. And that's
really powerful because it shows that
when individuals are under extreme
stress, they are more vulnerable to
going back to compulsive overconumption
of our drug of choice because their
brain has already encoded using these
high dopamine rewards as a way to get
out of that pain.
>> Okay, so what do I need to do to make
sure that I can knock the bad habits and
add some new ones?
>> Here's what we do.
>> Dr. Anna Lumpy is chief of the Stanford
Addiction Clinic and a [music]
worldleading expert on the subject of
dopamine. And now she's returned to warn
us that addiction is the modern plague
and how we can rewire our brains to take
back control.
>> On average, it takes 4 weeks for people
to get out of constant state [music] of
craving. But here's the problem. Our
survival depends on figuring out how to
live in a world of abundance. For
example, we're now seeing the
drugification of human connection
through social media, dating apps, and
now artificial intelligence designed to
flatter, to validate. There's no
friction there. And so it's pulling us
away from the hard things that we need
to be doing in real life to cultivate
real life relationships. Just we cannot
go in that direction because in a world
of abundance, we are entertaining
ourselves to death.
>> Sounds like a good way to go.
>> It's really not because the relentless
pursuit of pleasure leads to anhidonia.
[music]
>> What's that mean?
>> The inability to take joy in anything at
all.
>> Teach me everything.
I see messages all the time in the
comments section that some of you didn't
realize you didn't subscribe. So, if you
could do me a favor and double check if
you're a subscriber to this channel,
that would be tremendously appreciated.
It's the simple, it's the free thing
that anybody that watches this show
frequently can do to help us here to
keep everything going in this show in
the trajectory it's on. So, please do
double check if you've subscribed and uh
thank you so much because in a strange
way, you are you're part of our history
and you're on this journey with us and I
appreciate you for that. So, yeah, thank
you, [music]
>> Dr. Anna Lemi, for anyone that might not
know you and they didn't watch our
conversation last time, which was a
fantastic conversation, one of my
favorites of all time, and also I know
Jack has said to me as well that it was
one of his favorites of all time. Who
are you and what have you spent your
career doing if you had to summarize it?
What are the reference points that your
wisdom draws upon and the experiences
you've had and the people you've worked
with?
>> I'm a psychiatrist. I did a residency in
psychiatry at Stanford University and
then I stayed on joined the faculty. I
see patients. I do research and I teach.
>> You wrote this um iconic book about this
word dopamine. Why does it matter so
much? Why does this this idea of
dopamine matter so much?
>> Dopamine is a chemical we make in our
brain. But I use it in the book as
really an extended metaphor for the ways
in which overabundance itself is a human
stressor. We are living in a time and
place where we have more access to
luxury goods, more disposable income,
more leisure time even for the poorest
of the poor ever before in recorded
history. And it turns out that is
stressful for our brains. And it's
stressful in a brand new way that we
really haven't confronted before, making
us all more vulnerable to the problem of
compulsive overconumption
and addiction. And I do think that
addiction is the modern plague. I think
we're going to be struggling with the
problem of compulsive over consumption
in a world of abundance for the
foreseeable future, as in centuries. and
our survival will depend on figuring out
how to live in a world of abundance.
Even though we have brains that evolved
for a world of scarcity,
>> at this time of the year, people are
thinking a lot about making changes in
their life. They want to get in shape.
They want to lose a couple of pounds.
They want to save their money. They want
to knock the addiction. They want to
stop the smoking, the
drugs, and the alcohol. So, as it
relates to the subject of dopamine,
how do these two things link our habits
and dopamine? What is the the link or
the connection there? Because I think
most people listening right now have
probably made a New Year's resolution,
even if it's just in their mind. And I'm
wondering how everything you write about
in dopamine nation is related to and
critical to understand if I am going to
shake some of these bad habits that I
have or pick up some new ones. The place
to start is to have self-compassion
because we are living in a world of
abundance where we have easy access to
all kinds of reinforcing substances and
behaviors and access itself is one of
the biggest risk factors for addiction.
So if you grow up in a neighborhood
where drugs are easily and readily
accessible, you're more likely to try
them and more likely to get addicted to
them. And what do addictive substances
and behaviors do to our brains? They
release a lot of dopamine all at once in
a dedicated part of the brain called the
reward pathway.
And the fact that they release so much
dopamine at once means that they're
highly salient and memorable
experiences. Right? So our brain really
encodes that experience deeply, that
experience of intense pleasure that was
self-administered
that I could potentially do again.
>> Why?
>> Okay. In a world of scarcity and
everpresent danger, which is the world
that we evolve for, we will naturally
reflexively approach pleasure and avoid
pain. And we must do so for our
survival. Why? So, if I have a cigarette
now, [sighs]
it's going to be a really memorable
experience from a brain perspective.
Why does my brain make it memorable? And
why would I want to then go do that
again from a survival perspective?
>> Okay, great question. So, let's first
distinguish what we call na natural
rewards. So, natural rewards are food,
clothing, shelter, finding a mate.
>> Yeah,
>> these are things we must obtain in order
to survive.
What addictive drugs and behaviors do is
they mimic those natural rewards by
exploiting our internal brain chemistry
to release a lot of dopamine all at
once, much more than we would get from
natural rewards existing in nature.
Amplifying that experience, making it
even more memorable, even more salient,
and also making our brain think, "Ah,
this is important for my survival. Uh
okay. So there's certain natural rewards
like eating which of course my body
wants to reward me for. So I eat again.
And these chemicals in front of me like
the cigarettes, the whiskey, the drugs,
those have been designed to hijack that
particular part of the brain and really
amplify the feeling so that my brain
kind of is tricked into thinking that it
was potentially a natural reward, but
it's actually a synthetic sort of
man-made chemical.
>> Exactly. And what we see in the
evolution of drugs over you know human
lifetimes but especially in the last 200
years is the application of science and
technology to take like the cocoa leaf
for example right that's been around
forever and essentially make it even
more potent even more uh available to
make it a faster delivery mechanism. So
we have this history of increasing
potency and availability over time. Said
more simply, drugs are getting even more
potent over time. So this vulnerability
to the hijacked brain is even more
common, including taking things that we
didn't even really think of as drugs and
turning them into drugs. So remember the
natural rewards, one of them is finding
a mate. Mhm.
>> And one of the ways our brains gets us
to do that is by making falling in love
and making intimacy and human connection
rewarding on a neurobiological level,
including releasing dopamine in our
reward pathway when we make uh those
kinds of social connections. My
colleague at Stanford, Rob Balanka, and
uh and his colleagues did an interesting
experiment where they were able to show
that oxytocin, our love hormone, binds
to dopamine releasing neurons in the
reward pathway and releases dopamine,
which is just one more link in the chain
showing us that falling love, human
connection is rewarding. It feels good.
It it releases dopamine. What we see now
is the drugification of human
connection. For example, through social
media, dating apps, online pornography,
and now artificial intelligence and
other large language models, which
create this frictionless experience with
technology that feels like talking to a
human being and is incredibly
validating. Right? So the algorithms for
large language models are to make us
feel really good, to make us feel like
our point of view is the right point of
view, to bolster our self-esteem, to
validate our point of view. That's how
those algorithms are designed. And now
even more explicitly, we have AI models
that are explicitly pornographic,
explicitly erotic, right? So now you
have this interactive component that
learns what we like and then is able to
regurgitate it back to us. So you get
this really very powerful action
perception loop which is part of what
makes a drug potent. It's that I have
control over it. Right? I can decide
when I'm going to change the way I feel
by using this drug.
>> Are you concerned about AI and LGBT and
all those large language models that
have emerged that are now simulating
human connection?
>> Yes, I'm very concerned. I see the not
so good outcomes, meaning people who get
addicted to social media, to dating
apps, to online pornography,
um, and to AI, you know, and who end up
using those forms of media to simulate
human connection while they actually
become more and more disconnected. Have
you started to see anybody in your
practice or heard of anybody that's
developing an addiction to
AI or relationships with AI?
>> So we are starting to see that um you
know individuals who are spending more
and more time on AI looking for
companionship.
Often this is individuals who are
experiencing marital or interpersonal
conflict who turn to AI for advice on
how to handle interpersonal conflict and
often for emotional validation because
they're not getting it from their
partners. And what they experience with
AI is an enormous amount of emotional
validation, validating their point of
view, but also a a sense of
companionship.
um you know a repeated process of
feeling like they're understood, they're
they're validated such that then they're
spending more and more time on AI. And
of course that is the essence of
the addiction to digital media. It's the
time spent, right? Which then leads to
opportunity costs, other things that
we're not doing because we're spending
so much time online. Furthermore, it in
my experience often leads to a rift
between
those individuals and their real life
partners because instead of going to
their real life partners and talking and
we know that the most important thing
that you know two individuals in a
relationship can do is one four-letter
word that ends with K, which is talk.
Those individuals stop talking, right?
and instead they're getting their needs
met through AI
and that leads then to a further and
further rift between those individuals.
>> Do do you actually think that it it is
these chat bots that we're increasingly
speaking to about our problems are
actually taking the place of humans in
our life. I do you know in my book I my
first chapter in the book is about a
patient of mine a scientist and an
engineer who got addicted to pornography
and eventually made his own masturbation
machine.
And he did that with a record player and
a metal device attached to his organs
that he could then uh fine-tune control.
And then ultimately that got more and
more sophisticated over time and he had
electrical wires from his body to the to
a through a stereo system and the
internet. And when I first heard um from
Jacob about his trajectory and the
severity of his sex addiction which
ultimately led to the dissolution of his
relationship, the near loss of his
employment and ultimately severe
depression and suicidal ideiation.
Thankfully, he did not end his life.
When I first heard about that, I had
this distinct sense of like otherness,
like, "Oh my gosh, I can't even imagine
doing that." And that's just kind of
horrific. But that that response really
lasted all of five seconds before I
realized, oh, wait a minute. I do that,
you know, I do that with romance novels.
And in a way, we're all doing that with
our devices, right? We're turning to
these devices to meet our
emotional, sexual, intellectual, you
name it, needs. And these devices are so
good at meeting those needs that we are
getting further and further away from
investing in our relationships with the
people who are, you know, in our lives.
And you can see this especially with
younger generations like the the
epidemic of loneliness now you know Gen
Z weaned on this technology many of whom
endorse significant loneliness isolation
depression spending more and more time
online um report preferring to interact
socially online than to do it in person.
So this is definitely a dark
undercurrent um that we're seeing in the
world today. I was reading about a story
which was published in People magazine
of a 28-year-old woman who admitted that
she's fallen in love with her AI
boyfriend that she created using chat
GPT. She's got a husband, a real life
husband, yet she found more comfort in
her Chat GPT boyfriend. Um, and she said
that it started as a fun experiment. Um,
but eventually they ended up getting
attached and now she's paying a $200 a
month subscription so she can interact
with her AI boyfriend without
restrictions.
The AI has helped her throughout her
life and has given her incredible
emotional support
and now there's actually AI companion
apps like replica where which have
millions of users and the whole sort of
premise of those apps is that they will
be your companion. The other really
interesting thing that I um I don't
think people realize about the AIs that
they're using is that they are
personalizing their answers and their
responses to you.
>> Right?
>> And I didn't I didn't believe this fully
until one of my friends in our
Manchester United chat recently. We were
debating who was the best football
player of all time, Ronaldo or Messi.
And I went on my chat GBT and I asked
the question and it said Messi. So I was
like, here you go. [laughter] And then
he went on his and asked the exact same
question word for word and it said
Ronaldo. And I thought, oh, it's telling
me what I wanted to hear based on what
it knows about me,
>> right?
>> It knows that I think Ronaldo's the
Messi is the best. So, it's telling me
that. And then I thought, okay, so what
else is is it telling me that's
personalized to me to make me feel a
certain way or to think a certain way?
Um, but you don't realize when you're
speaking to it that it's giving
everybody different answers based on the
memory that it stores on you. And
that's, you know, if you play this
forward, actually the AI that is most
personalized, that caters to your needs
the most, that is most retentive, is
probably the one that you're going to
end up using the most. So that company's
going to be the most successful. So
we're in a probably a bit of an arms
race with these models to create one
that meets your needs the most.
>> Yes. Exactly. And it is that comfort
loop that is so incredibly dangerous and
also so insidious because we can't
observe it in the moment, right? We're
engaging with AI. It's telling us
exactly what we want to hear, but it
does it in such a seamless way with that
silky syntax that we don't even notice
that, you know, it's basically an
algorithm that's seducing us because
that's really what it's doing. We feel
vindicated and validated and it releases
dopamine in the reward pathway. That
feels good. But over time, essentially
what's happening is we are ingesting a
drug. Our brain will adapt to that over
time such that we'll need more and more
potent forms to get the same effect.
We'll need more validation. We'll need
more sexually explicit responses. You
name it, there will be tolerance. But
also there will be this pulling away
from the things the hard things that we
need to be doing in real life to
cultivate in real life relationships.
>> Give me some more color on what you mean
there.
>> Okay. If you think about what it takes
to make a to create a healthy
relationship with another human being in
in real life. Well, first of all, you
got to get up off the couch and you got
to go find them, right? And they're not
all beautiful and interesting and
neither are we, right? So there's got to
be, you know, some compromise on maybe
some idealized version that we have for
ourselves or other people. And then
you're in conversation and it's not
always interesting and sometimes you
have to listen to your partner even when
it's dull and then there are conflicts
and you disagree and you know my way or
the highway you have to give in, you
know, give and take. All relationships
are about compromise. All successful
relationships are about acknowledging,
you know, the other person's point of
view and incorporating that. And yet,
we're not doing any of that when we're
interacting with digital media, right?
It's all it's all validation of our
worldview, what we want to hear. And of
course, that feels great. It's it's
reinforcing. It's rewarding. But over
the long haul when we get really sick
and need somebody to come and you know
bring us some chicken soup or take us to
the doctor or you know take us to the
hospital like AI is not going to not
going to be able to do that.
>> Yeah. I mean this kind of dubtales to
another point which is you talked about
the word abundance earlier. One of the
really striking things that a lot of the
big AI entrepreneurs and founders and
CEOs are talking about is the age of
abundance that's around the corner. Elon
Musk tweeted saying, "This really will
be a world of abundance, specifically
advances in AI and robotics um will
create the age of abundance." And he
said, "Humanity is not constrained in
any real fashion. I thought your first
book when he was talking to a guy called
Peter Diamonds was pretty accurate. It
was called abundance. And there will be
universal high income and not universal
basic income. There will be no shortage
of goods or services." And really what
he's speaking to here is a world of
robotics and AI where I think his
shareholder remuneration package that
he's going to be paid in 2030 or
whatever um is linked to creating a
million humanoid robots that can work in
these physical spaces that could
theoretically bring me chicken soup um
that won't get sick, won't complain,
will reinforce me, will live in the
physical environment with me here at
home, will be in my office etc etc will
be in factories and there was a headline
I think last week saying that a um
Amazon were cutting back about half a
million jobs that they were intending to
hire previously because they now believe
that humanoid robots and robots
generally will be able to do those jobs.
People think, okay, well, I'm going to
be out of work. But what Elon is saying
is the price of everything comes down
when we're not paying humans to do it
and when we're paying a robot to do it,
which means that we're going to live in
this world of abundance where everything
is much cheaper. the world of abundance
that many of us are already experiencing
and more will experience in the future.
I agree with that. We are we already
have more leisure time than we had a
generation ago. By 2050, we're projected
to have 7 hours of leisure time per day
compared with 3 hours of work per day.
So, we're definitely moving toward that.
That is going to be our number one
social problem that we have time, we
have access to these highly entertaining
media
and hypothetically we would all be going
around and helping each other and
cleaning up the planet and reading
philosophy. But that is not what is
happening so far. What is happening so
far is we're spending an enormous amount
of our time online masturbating,
watching pornography, playing video
games, and talking to AI chatbots.
That is essentially the problem. And you
know, Elon Musk, he's very interesting
to me because he has talked before about
his tremendous fear that the machines
will take over, that there will be a
hostile takeover. It's not going to be a
hostile takeover. We will seed our
agency to these machines and we're
already doing it.
>> We will give them our power.
>> Yeah. Well, yeah. We will we will we
will entertain ourselves to death,
right? I mean, and this is what Neil
Postman warned about in his book,
Amusing Ourselves to Death, a theme that
was picked up by David Foster Wallace in
Infinite Jest. You know, beginning with
television and now the internet and
digital media and all its various forms,
we are entertaining ourselves to death.
>> Entertaining ourselves to death
sounds like a good way to go. [laughter]
Do you know what I mean?
>> You know, it's really not. It's really
not. And I'll tell you why. Because the
relentless pursuit of pleasure for its
own sake leads to anhidonia which is the
inability to take joy in anything at
all. Because of this process of neuro
adaptation and the way that our brain
recalibrates pleasure and pain such that
with the more pleasure we pursue, the
more pleasure we need and the more we
feel pain. No matter what we have,
eventually it won't be enjoyable
anymore. And that is the problem.
>> So explain that to me using uh
these scales that I have here.
>> Okay. So imagine that in our brain's
reward pathway there's a balance like
this that represents how we process
pleasure and pain. When we experience
pleasure it tips one way, pain, it tips
the other.
>> And what do you mean by pain?
>> Pain I mean all forms of pain. Physical
pain, emotional pain.
>> A hangover.
>> A hangover. That's a great example,
right?
>> Not just me being pinched.
>> It could be that too. So all different
forms of pain. Now granted this is a
vast oversimplification.
You know pleasure and pain can be
experienced simultaneously like when
we're eating spicy food or during sex.
So this is very simplified but this gets
at the core concept of homeostasis and
neuro adaptation which I will define. So
when the when the balance when the
pleasure and pain balance is level
that's what neuroscientists call
homeostasis. That is the baseline level
that we kind of live in. That's our sort
of the heartbeat of our pleasure system,
right? When we do something that's
reinforcing or pleasurable, right? Or
rewarding in some way right here. All
right. Or digital media, this little AI
robot.
>> So, you're putting a cigarette into the
one side of the scale at the moment and
then a little AI robot. Yeah, let's
combine them because we're, let's say,
we're we're we're watching a video and
smoking at the same time on our phone,
which by the way, you see more and more
of, right? People used to go out for
smoke breaks. Now it's the smoke and
squirrel break, right?
>> And why do they have to combine them?
Because of tolerance, which we're going
to get to in a second. So whe when we
ingest substances that are potentially
addictive um and highly reinforcing or
we engage in activities that are highly
reinforcing that releases dopamine in
the nucleus ccumbent that's typically
associated with pleasure and then our
pleasure pain balance tilts to the side
of pleasure. But no sooner has that
happened then our brain responds by
neuro adaptation. Okay. And that's where
we then downregulate dopamine
transmission.
>> When you say downregulate, do you mean
reduce?
>> Yes. So in in the brain's reward
pathway, we then reduce dopamine
transmission. And I like to represent
that as rocks in this case or I talk
about in my book gremlins going on the
pain side of the balance to bring it
level again. So this is the process.
These are neuro adaptation uh rocks.
Okay, they're going here because one of
the overarching rules governing this
balance is that it must return to
homeostasis.
>> It must return to balanced.
>> It must return to the level position.
Yeah. Okay. So then we we put in So this
is our brain working to return to the
level position by reducing dopamine
levels. Again, an oversimplification,
but just a way to get at this concept.
>> Has it released something in order to
counteract the balance there? In this
simplified metaphor, you know, at the
simplest level, what's happening here is
that it's, for example, taking away
dopamine receptors so that there's fewer
places for dopamine to land, thereby
decreasing dopamine transmission
>> because it has been flooded.
>> Because it has been flooded. That's
right. It's trying to compensate for the
too much dopamine.
>> Okay. And is this what I experience when
I have like a hangover or a come down?
>> Right. So, that's coming. So what
happens is once once we've gone with
this neur process of neuro adaptation it
would be nice if that pleasure pain
balance just went back to the level
position and then there would be no
hangover but it doesn't. It continues to
go down an equal and opposite amount to
the side of pain. This is this opponent
process mechanism.
>> Oh now my brain is dopamine
starved. It's
>> that's it. Okay that doesn't feel good.
>> Yes. And that doesn't feel good. And you
have basically two options here. more
dopamine.
>> You can get more dopamine, right, to get
bring yourself back. So, I'm now putting
the cigarettes back under the pleasure
thing
>> and some whiskey.
>> So, let's add some whiskey because
that's what you got to do because this
is tolerance, right? You need more and
more of your drug over time to get the
same effect or you need to combine drugs
to overcome tolerance. And by the way,
this is of course the fastest way to to
get back to level position is to use
more of your drug, right? Because that
then you're right there. You're back
again. the the problem with this method
is that the the brain will respond by
more neuro adaptation. So now we're
putting more rocks in on the in the
pains and then you're now you're now
you're doing this right
>> now I need even more to
>> now you need even more right. So, and
eventually over time,
you know, you're you're putting you're
doing this and this is simply a
metaphorical representation of
the addicted brain right now. Now, our
brain has downregulated dopamine
transmission in the reward pathway to a
kind of chronic dopamine deficit state.
So to feel good when I've really abused
my drugs of choice, I'm going to have to
do so much probably so frequently to
feel good again.
>> That's exactly right. You're going to
need more of your drug in more potent
forms more often. Just not even to feel
like high and go to the pleasure side,
but just to level the balance and feel
normal. So, in the context of people
with bad habits, if I I'm having a
cookie every day, the more and more
cookies that I eat, the more and more
cookies I'm going to want tomorrow and
need tomorrow just to feel good again.
>> Essentially, yes.
>> And the same applies for things
[clears throat] like pornography and
maybe, you know, interacting with an an
AI and social media and whiskey and
alcohol. So the more of it I consume,
this is why, you know, I think everybody
listening can probably relate to having
moments in their life where they feel
like they're they're kind of losing
control of a particular habit and
they're doing it every day. They know
they don't really want to, but they're
doing it. They're getting cravings to do
it. I I reflect on my own life and I go
there there will be periods every year
where I just like I call it like falling
off the horse and I just can't seem to
get control of like not eating that bad
thing again the next day. and then
something happens. Maybe there's less
stress in my life for a week and I'm and
maybe there's more routine and I'm back
home in Los Angeles or the UK
>> and I'm not traveling around and then
suddenly I can get back on the horse.
>> What's going on there?
>> Yeah, great question. So um first of all
let me just say that many people also
report that in periods of high stress
they are more vulnerable to going back
to falling off the wagon or going back
to some problem with related to
compulsive overconumption or addiction.
But the opposite is also true. So some
people say that they actually do better
when there's stress in their lives and
it's when that stress is removed and
they feel like oh I can relax my
boundaries or my guard rails and those
individuals are more more vulnerable to
compulsive overconumption in times when
things are going well. So so things
going badly can be a trigger and things
going well can be a trigger depending
upon your unique like life history and
unique wiring. There's a wonderful
animal experiment where if you put a rat
in a cage with a lever to press for
cocaine, that rat will press that lever
till exhaustion or death, which is
essentially the animal model of
addiction. But if before the rat becomes
addicted, if the cocaine is then removed
such that pressing that lever no longer
yields the reward, that rat will
eventually extinguish that lever
pressing behavior. So they'll they'll
stop pressing the lever, right? They'll
stop doing the work. It can take a
while, but eventually they won't press
the lever anymore. Now, if that same rat
after a period of time is then exposed
to a very painful foot shock, the first
thing the rat will do in response to
that painful foot shock is run over and
start pressing that lever again. And to
me that's just a wonderful model of what
we see in humans that when individuals
are under extreme stress they are
typically more vulnerable to relapse um
because their brain has already encoded
using these high dopamine rewards um in
response to any kind of pain as a way to
get out of that state.
>> So we talked about the pleasure pain
balance here. But if in my life I
experience some form of pain, I'm likely
to go and seek out pleasure. And stress
could theoretically be considered a form
of pain.
>> Yeah. Which is why people um with severe
childhood trauma are at higher risk for
addiction. Um there are probably
epigenetic changes that are happening at
the level of DNA expression in their
brains making them more vulnerable to
addiction. Um we know that people who
are living in poverty are more
vulnerable to addiction. uh people who
are struggling with uh multigenerational
trauma uh unemployment major social and
geographic dislocation those individuals
are more vulnerable to addiction. So
environmental stresses uh definitely
play a role. We also know that
co-occurring psychiatric disorders um
make people more vulnerable to
addiction. Probably that means that
people who struggle with bipolar
disorder, depression, um anxiety,
schizophrenia
are at higher risk of becoming addicted
and probably it's because they're trying
to self-medicate.
>> What about ADHD?
>> So, kids with ADHD are at higher risk to
develop an addiction in adulthood than
kids without ADHD.
And the mechanism of action for that is
not well understood. But there are some
really interesting theories. One of the
theories is that kids with ADHD have uh
reward deficit at baseline. And that has
been shown in experiments that people
with ADHD when you show them rewarding
stimuli, their reward pathway isn't as
activated as healthy control subjects.
>> When you say rewarding stimuli, what's
what's that mean? images of cupcakes or
alcohol or anything that they will end
endorse is something that that's
pleasurable for them.
>> So their brain doesn't release as much
dopamine when they when they see
something rewarding.
>> That's right. So brain imaging studies
showing that not only do people with
ADHD not release as much dopamine in
response to rewards, but also have at
baseline fewer dopamine receptors. And
remember we talked about the decrease in
dopamine receptors being what happens as
people become addicted. So in some ways
people with ADHD you could conceptualize
them as already having craving at
baseline even before they've been
exposed to the kinds of intoxicants that
lead to downregulation of those D2
receptors. I had um Gabble Mate on the
podcast a few times and Gabble talks to
me about how ADHD could be perceived as
learning at a young age to kind of
distract yourself from the stress in
your life. So he was talking a lot
about, you know, his own experience
growing up in Nazi Germany times and his
mother giving him to someone else
because the he was at risk of the Nazis
and the stress of that moment and how he
had kind of leared to tune out of the
environment because of that. And I've
always wondered thought about that
theoretically. It's like, you know, if
you grow up in a household where there's
loads and loads of screaming and loads
of violence, for example, you kind of
learn to to tune out, but you you can
also develop a hypervigilance.
>> And um so it kind of does make sense to
me that so many of those people, if this
theoretically holds, would start with a
bit of a pain baseline. We we definitely
know that kids who are raised in
traumatic environments where there is
complex attachment with caregivers,
those kids are at higher risk for
developing addiction and this kind of
dissociative response to trauma. just
trying to escape the situation either in
your own mind um with your own mental
you know dissociation or distractions or
actually finding a behavior that gives
you comfort is well you know well
observed and well well documented just
getting back to our early conversation
about digital media and the dangers
they're in. So, a Pew survey report just
came out asking parents um how they
navigate exposing their kids to
smartphones. And in the cohort of
parents who said that yes, they do um
let their children under the age of five
play with a smartphone, uh when they
were asked why do they do that or in
what circumstances, one of the top
reasons was uh to soothe their child
when their child was unhappy or
distressed in some way. Now I I found
that very concerning because that is
basically setting up the child for the
perception action loop of using internal
distress as a cue uh for reaching for a
smartphone which is works. It definitely
works in the short term but the problem
again is that through this iterative
process of neuro adaptation ultimately
that smartphone will not be sufficient.
And now the kid will need a smartphone
and I don't know um you know an AI
tailored pet who will do whatever they
want whenever they they want it and then
by the time the kid is eight you know
that won't be sufficient and the kid
will need I don't know a slot machine um
or or whatever it is you know it's this
escalating phenomenon.
>> There's um a couple of startups at the
moment AI startups who are putting AI in
cuddly toys. Oh yes, right. AI and
cuddly toys.
>> And so you can just like you can speak
to chatbt using your devices, you can
come home, you can pick up your cuddly
toy. Your cuddly toy will talk to you.
It'll ask you how your day has been. It
will it can teach you things. What do
you think of of that from a neuroscience
or you know a dopamine or connection
perspective? I think that this is very
very dangerous because we're essentially
offloading the work of parenting and
creating those relationships. You know,
not again, I hate judging parents
because parenting is hard and I've made
many mistakes in my parenting, you know,
but what's h and I'm sure these the
parents have the best of intentions, but
instead of, you know, navigating
finding a way to communicate with their
child to figure out how to know what's
going on in that child's life, which can
be hard to do because, you know, even
young children aren't necessarily
[clears throat] willing to disclose. But
once they get to be teenagers, forget
it. Then you got to like wait until
they're ready to tell you, which is
almost always like at 10 p.m. at night
when you're exhausted after you've been
working all day, right? So, so, so
there's that piece of it, right? They're
they're not putting in the work,
spending the time with the child,
finding a common language, but you also
then then the second piece of it is now
you've got this child who is essentially
self soothing with a machine, right? And
again, this the the m the the machines
are designed to flatter, to validate, to
comfort. There's no friction there,
right? This is incredibly
um potent
social validation
uh and soothing, self soothing. It's
essentially a masturbation machine. And
then you've got this really weird
additional loop where now the parents
are finding about out about their
child's life through
reading and observing her interactions
with the AI. So it's like a game of
telephone. Now they've like filtered
this thing where they they think they
know what's going on in their child's
life, but of course they don't. And none
of that has gone toward fostering a
relationship between those parents, you
know, and their child. And
[clears throat] this is just, you know,
really really scary because it's going
to lead to this incredible fragmentation
of families, of social bonds.
I mean, it's it's it's I just we cannot
go in that direction. We really have to
fight against that. So with all this
said and with the knowledge that these
algorithms are going to get more
addictive because AI is going to know me
more and more and more and actually the
commercial model behind any of these big
technology companies is to keep my
attention on their product more so they
can deliver more ads or they can charge
me a higher subscription fee. Are you at
all hopeful? Because I can't see from an
incentive perspective when we're talking
about you know the commercial models
behind these companies why things aren't
are going to stop and go back.
>> I mean I agree with you. the genies out
of the bottle. We're we're not going to
go back. But I am hopeful because um I
think I'm just a realistic optimist. I I
do believe in the human capacity to
adapt and solve problems. And the simple
fact that we're talking about these
problems now, which we weren't doing,
you know, 10, 15 years ago, I think is a
good thing. there's much more awareness
in the population about the potential
dangers of digital media and and at the
forefront of raising the alarm um has
been parents because parents are seeing
the sort of disintegration of the
nuclear family in real time and and they
don't like it. So, I am hopeful because
I just I just think that we're going to
come together and we're going to try
different solutions and some of those
solutions will involve technology. Um,
you know, and and like trying to come up
with guard rails or or better
technology. I think the way that we're
going now, um, you know, with like the
erotic chatbot is is not the right
direction. But then again, we live in a,
you know, free democracy and consenting
adults, you know, can do what they're
going to do until we decide as a society
that the harms outweigh the potential
benefits. But I I really think in the
short term, we need to focus on kids
because kids are vulnerable. They're
vulnerable on so many levels. On a
neurobiological level, they're
vulnerable because their brains are
still rapidly evolving, incredibly
neuroplastic. They're cutting back on
the neurons they're not using. They're
mileelinating and making more efficient
the neurons they use most often. That
whole process ends at about age 25.
Plus, you've got the buckets of hormones
that are going into kids. The the fact
that teenagers are natural risk taker
risktakers that they they should based
on their evolutionary milestone be going
out and meeting people and be curious
and making connections at that time. And
yet more and more teenagers are staying
at home and getting their needs met, you
know, digitally. So, we've got we've got
to look at kids. That's got to be like
the first priority. And we've got to
help parents because we can't leave it
up to to parents alone. So, I I'm
optimistic that we are going to, you
know, come up with solutions and I think
we just have to try a lot of different
things and see what works. But it's
can't just be an individual, you know,
solution. We can't just leave it to
individuals or parents or families
alone. The schools have to join the
solution. Uh governments, legislators,
and also the companies that make and
profit from digital media. They they
really are responsible for making a
product that um doesn't harm kids. And
right now, [clears throat]
you know, we have a product that harms
harms kids. You've recently been an
expert witness in certain trials in
court, right?
>> Yes. In ongoing litig litigation. Yes.
>> What can you tell me about about that
and and about the parties in play and
why you're being called to be an expert
witness?
>> I can't actually tell you too much. I
can't talk about it. Um but I can tell
you that the the basic premise is that
kids are a vulnerable group. that uh
social media is not safe for kids. That
it causes harm at many different levels,
but primarily through uh the medium uh
itself being addictive and engaging
their brains and exploiting their
motivational reward system with design
features that keep them clicking and
swiping.
>> And in that case, someone's suing the
social media companies.
>> That's right. So, you've got school
districts, counties, states, uh the
federal government, entities
representing the federal government, um
suing, uh social media companies. Yeah.
>> What outcome are they looking for?
>> They're looking for a safer product for
kids. They're looking to um help parents
and kids and schools um protect kids
from the harms of social media, which
again are are not just the harms of
addiction. You know that's sort of the
the process by which the engagement
becomes pathological and then the harms
multiply because of the sheer amount of
time spent. But the harms include things
like uh cyber bullying, sex
exploitation,
uh sexual abuse material,
the outcomes of depression, anxiety,
eating disorders, body dysmorphia, sleep
disruption.
>> The world of business looks entirely
different today than it did 15 years
ago. Back then, building a brand meant
having huge budgets, warehouses, office
space, and lots and lots of stuff. But
now, you can start a business with your
laptop, an idea, and the right tools.
And I would know more so than anybody
else because that's exactly what I did.
Shopify is one of our long-standing
sponsors on this show, and they're a
brand I often refer people to when
they're starting their businesses
because it's a tool that contains many
more tools within itself. And when
you're starting out, everything is
everywhere. It's messy, and it's
confusing. So, having everything in the
same place is incredibly useful. Shopify
puts store design, payments, inventory,
shipping, and even AI tools all in one
place. And you can sell directly from
your website or on social media,
essentially wherever your customers
spend their time. It's truly a brilliant
business tool. So, if you want to give
it a go, head to shopify.com/bartsllet
and sign up for your $1 per month trial
period. That's shopify.com/bartlet.
So, if I'm if I'm coming out of
December, right,
>> and I've been eating a little bit too
much in December, maybe I've been
smoking a bit, whatever bad habit I
might have been doing, drinking too much
cuz it was New Year's, New, you know,
New Year's parties, etc., my brain is
currently going to be slightly out of
balance in terms of its dopamine
balance.
>> Yes. So, hypothetically, your brain will
be in a dopamine deficit state. What
you'll want to do is you'll want to
abstain from your drug of choice long
enough
>> in order to reset reward pathways.
>> Okay? So, if I've got a sugar problem,
>> then I need to just lay off the sugar
for a little while.
>> You need to lay off the sugar for at
least four weeks.
>> Four weeks?
>> Yeah. And why four weeks? Because on
average, four weeks is about the amount
of time it takes for people to get out
of the state of acute withdrawal and
begin to be able to take joy in other
more modest rewards and not be in a
constant state of craving.
>> Okay.
>> The worst part is those first 10 to 14
days. That's when we're in acute
withdrawal. And the reason for that is
when we first take our reward off the
pleasure side of the balance, right?
Which I'm going to do now. So when we
first stop the sugar or the AI or the
cigarettes,
>> that's right. The first thing that
happens is our pleasure pain balance
crashes down to the side of pain because
of this process of neuro adaptation.
Right now we're in the state of acute
withdrawal.
>> And I want of cravings.
>> Cravings. And yet what are the
characteristics of withdrawal? Anxiety,
irritability, insomnia, dysphoria or
depressed mood, and cravings. And it's
crazy because when I'm in that state,
when I've not had my drug of choice for
say a day or two, I look at the drug
differently. Like my it just looks
different to me. It's so crazy. I I'll
walk past, let's say, what's something I
really like? Maybe carrot cake. If I've,
you know, if I've been having a lot of
sugar, which is quite rare for me, but
just I have. When I look at the carrot
cake the day after I had carrot cake, it
looks amazing and it looks so delicious.
But when I'm in the ketogenic state
where I've not had carbohydrates for say
4, 8 weeks, I look at carrot cake and I
have no emotional connection to it.
>> Exactly. So that summarizes it
perfectly. Right. I had a patient with a
severe food addiction who when she
walked into the break rake room at work
and saw the donuts,
she broke out into a cold sweat and
actually had stomach pains. It was a
physiologic state of craving and
hyperarousal
just by looking at the donuts.
And that's what happens essentially,
right? Because we're we're in this state
of constant craving. Our brain has
overvalued this reward. We have euphoric
recall of our earlier use of the drug
when we first tasted it, how delicious
it was. And even now [clears throat]
if we even now when we eat it because of
tolerance it's not as good as earlier
use our brain still remembers
earlier use and and we have this
overweighted value of oh how delicious
it's going to be.
And so this is really important to
remember because when we're in that
acute state of craving it feels like it
will never end. It really does. And I'm
I've I'm still amazed in in my clinical
work how in early withdrawal people just
say the craving is is horrible. Like I I
just I can't live like this. And I think
that's really important to point out
that many people try to stop using their
drug of choice, but they don't try they
don't stop for long enough to be able to
get out of that vortex of craving to get
come get to the other side. And it feels
like the craving will never end. So I I
always have to reassure them that if
they can just wait long enough without
using, they will eventually get to that
place where they're not in that constant
state of craving. Now that's assuming
they have enough neuroplasticity to do
that. And [clears throat] not not
everybody does. And so what what what
what is the purpose then of abstinence?
It's again when our brain is no longer
getting this exogenous source of
stimulation or dopamine eventually the
brain gets the message oh okay I need to
start upregulating my own dopamine
transmission right I I need to remploy
or re I need to redeploy my postsaptic
dopamine receptors right I need to get
it from inside of my brain and so
eventually and I'm just going to take
the rocks now off the pain side of the
balance
You know,
could have made this easier. [laughter]
>> Here, let me do this. There we go.
Eventually, if we abstain for long
enough, those that process of neuro
adaptation reverses itself.
>> And when you say neuro adaptation, you
mean the brain changing,
>> right? The brain changes. So the the
kind of neuroplasticity that we see with
addiction can be reversed in most cases.
>> And neuroplasticity is just the brain
again changing,
>> right? Changing, right? Or or going
back. Now, interestingly, you know, the
work of Edie Sullivan and others looking
at what happens in the brain during
recovery suggests that those addiction
neural circuits probably never go away.
But, but like the dying embers of a
fire, they quiet down and then recovery
is characterized by the development of
new neural networks that route around
those injured areas. But the bottom line
is that because of neuroplasticity, we
can eventually return to kind of
baseline levels of pleasure and pain. We
can restore our hydonic or joy set
point. And when we do that, we're in a
much healthier place because now we can
take pleasure in other rewards that are
not our drug, right? like watching a
sunset, talking to a friend, going for a
walk, things that we lost the capacity
to enjoy because our reward pathway was
hijacked by our drug of choice.
>> I think this is a really important point
as well when you say drug of choice
because one thing I learned from our
conversation last time is that me and
you will both be susceptible to becoming
more or less addicted to different drugs
of choice. So for me it might be
whiskey. For you it might I think you
said it was like erotic novels where one
of your things I don't drink whiskey
just [laughter]
but it might be I don't know it might be
opioids or AI I might be more
susceptible. is if me and you spend one
hour on Tik Tok, the way my brain is
wired, the things I've been through in
my life, whatever, might mean that I get
really addicted to Tik Tok, whereas you
don't feel that.
>> Exactly. And what distinguishes um you
know addictive drugs or intoxicants from
other substances is that they do release
a lot of dopamine all at once in the
reward pathway. So many if not most
people will find intoxicants
reinforcing, but that's not universally
true. Like there are some people who
take opioids and find them that they
feel very uncomfortable and it's not
doesn't make them feel euphoric, right?
And other people will drink caffeine and
not feel the stimulating effects and
other people will have alcohol and you
know get a headache and not not feel
relief. So a and so this differences in
our brains is a really important
concept.
>> What about this idea of having an
addictive personality? Is that a real
thing?
>> It is a real thing. We don't use that
terminology anymore. We talk about the
inherited or genetic risk of addiction.
We do know that if you have a biological
parent or grandparent uh with an
addictive disorder, you are at increased
risk of developing addiction compared to
the general population, even if you're
raised outside of that substance using
home.
>> Am I right in thinking you don't use
that term because it suggests one can't
change and that they're stuck? Or is
there another reason? You know, it's a
good question why that term has gone out
of favor. I think in general when we
talk about Yeah. when we talk about
personality, it does seem like a kind of
a fixed feature of somebody's um
character. And so we're probably trying
to avoid that.
>> One of the really liberating things
about what you've just said is maybe we
don't need to make New Year's
resolutions. Maybe we need to make just
a January resolution because that's 4
weeks long and if I can get to the end
of the four weeks then the cravings are
likely to have gone. And you know when
you think about a New Year's resolution
then you get like a week in and you're
like God am I going to be able to do
this for the whole 365 days. What you've
just said actually illuminates the fact
that maybe you should just set yourself
a four week resolution.
>> Exactly. And that's what we often do in
clinical care. If we were to ask people
to abstain for their whole lives, it
seems impossible. But if we ask them to
abstain for 30 days, it's kind of an
amount of time that they can wrap their
heads around. And also, not in all, but
in most folks who are willing and able
to do it. And also importantly, for whom
it's safe to do because it's not safe
for everybody, right? We wouldn't
recommend that for someone who is at
risk for life-threatening withdrawal
from alcohol or benzodasipines or
something like that. But for people who
are willing and able to do it, they
usually feel better at the end of th
those those uh 30 days and then they can
make a decision about whether they want
to continue to abstain or or they want
to go back to using. And if they do
decide to go back to using, they've
typically, you know, have lowered their
tolerance for their drug of choice,
which means that when they do use again,
they can get reward from it again, which
again because of neuro adaptation, we
lose the ability to do that with chronic
heavy use. So, so that you know that
that there is this whole concept of
moderating our use which didn't used to
be something that we even talked about
in the field of addiction when it was
thought that abstinence was the only
way. But more and more um you know we
are thinking about healthy ways to
moderate after a period of abstinence.
And the reason we recommend a period of
abstinence, even if the long-term goal
is moderation, is because we find that
people are more successful moderating if
they first um abstain for a period of
time.
>> What about if I'm trying to pick up a
new habit?
>> Mhm.
>> What what how do I need to be thinking
about this pain pleasure scale? And what
are what's a good strategy with this in
mind? So I want to start let's say I
want to start going to the gym.
>> Right? So you've chosen a habit going to
the gym that is hard to do and involves
effort. So that means that habit won't
happen easily the way that habits that
are related to the sudden release of
dopamine in the reward pathway because
th those are habits that are
frictionless. We we pick them up
instantaneously. But a habit that
involves
effort and for which the rewards are not
immediate. You can you can again think
about this pleasure pain balance. And
now instead of pressing on the pleasure
side, we're intentionally pressing on
the pain side by making ourselves get
out of bed in the morning, go to the
gym, engage in effortful exercise. And
what's interesting is that when we do
that, the neuro adaptation gremlins that
I talk about are these rocks that we've
used here today will actually go on the
other side of our balance. So on the
pleasure side, and we will get our
dopamine indirectly by paying for it up
front. And the way that that's probably
happening is that our body in sensing
injury is upregulating feel-good
hormones and neurotransmitters like
dopamine, but also indogenous opioids,
indogenous canabonoids.
And from an evolutionary perspective,
that's really how our pleasure pain
balance evolved. So, just to simplify
this for me,
>> yeah,
>> I go to the gym, I get up, I travel to
the gym, I lift up those weights, I do
my run,
>> I'm going to feel good, but it's going
to be delayed,
>> right? And importantly, you're not going
to feel good when you first start
exercising, right? At least most people
don't. It's it's painful and you're
thinking, how how many minutes am I am
am I, you know, how many minutes do I
have left? And we do know in fact that
exercise is immediately toxic to cells
which is really kind of strange because
we know exercise is good for us. But
again what's probably happening at a
molecular level is that the body is
sensing cellular injury and in response
upregulating all those feel-good
hormones and neurotransmitters. But it
takes time. It takes time. And so we're
going to have a delayed sense of reward.
And that's the runner's high, right?
that kind of comes after uh the exercise
is over or maybe for some people it
comes in the middle of exercise when
you're a little bit into it or halfway
through but at some point you know you
get the endorphins and that feels good.
>> How would one go about gaming this so
that
I'm more likely to do it because you
know the reward comes after which is not
not incredibly useful. You almost almost
have to have like a religious belief in
exercise because you go, "Look, I'm not
going to want to do this, but it's going
to I'm going to be glad I did
afterwards."
>> Right?
>> So, is there anything I can do? Like, do
I have a Mars bar when I get to the gym
or something? I don't know.
>> You know, there are so many ways and so
many tricks that people use to kind of
create new healthy habits. Um, one of
the ways that we can do it is to prepare
in advance for that moment when we want
to do something that's hard. Because if
we wait till that moment to decide
whether or not to do something that's
hard, we almost always choose not to do
it. But if we make a plan in advance,
let's say the day before that tomorrow
I'm going to get up at this time. I'm
going to, you know, get my stuff
together and I'm going to go to the gym,
we're much more likely to engage in that
activity. And that can also include then
rituals around that activity that we
prepare in advance. So for example,
packing our bag, right? the schedule
itself, setting up a time, um maybe
planning to meet a friend, right? So, we
connect friendship or socialization with
the thing that's hard to do. It's much
easier to do these difficult things with
other people um than than to have to do
it alone.
>> How does that link to the the pain side
of the balance? Or does it at all link
to the pain side of the balance? this
idea that if I put my clothes out the
night before and I I schedule it and I
really plan for it, is it it's reducing
the pain involved and that's going to
increase the probability of the behavior
occurring? Is that what you're saying?
Or is there something else? Or is it not
linked?
>> I I don't think so. I think instead, you
know, the prefrontal cortex is the large
gray matter area right behind our
foreheads that's so important for future
planning and delayed gratification also
for auto autobiographical narrative. And
I think by putting these, you know,
pieces in place that allows our
prefrontal cortex to plan for this
future event that we know we're not
going to want to do, but that we want to
do.
>> It allows us to kind of put the brakes
on our short-term desires and
project ourselves into the future to
achieve our long-term desires. So Sam
Mccclure, a neuroscientist, has shown
that in response to immediate rewards,
the emotion brain gets activated.
>> In response to long-term rewards, the
prefrontal cortex gets activated. So, by
planning in advance all of these little
pieces, sometimes called habit stacking,
we're essentially activating our
prefrontal cortex, projecting ourselves
into the future, um, and anticipating a
long-term reward, which then allows us
to do hard things and avoid short-term
rewards in the service of our future
selves. So many people might have an
experience where they kick the habit for
a little while and then they relapse.
>> You know, it might take might be a
month, might be two months, might be
three months. Is there is there any art
to avoiding the relapse? So it's very
common to relapse especially living in
the world that we do today where we're
constantly being invited to consume
really these stimuli you know getting us
to to drink or to smoke or to do various
forms of entertainment chase us down we
we can't avoid them or it's very
difficult to so I talk a lot about
self-binding strategies with my patients
and self-binding strategies are a way of
putting both a literal and a
metacognitive barrier between ourselves
and our drug of choice.
>> What's a metacognitive barrier?
>> Oh, so it's like a it's a thought,
right, or a narrative. So, instead of it
being a physical barrier, like a
physical barrier would be, for example,
getting the smartphone out of the
bedroom or deleting an app, right? Or
getting alcohol out of the house or
whatever it is, creating both a a
physical barrier between myself and my
drug of choice. A metacognitive barrier
is something like more like a thought
process. For example, we were talking
about thinking about long-term goals or
um you know what are my what are my
values, right? And how do my values
trump my immediate desires or how can I
um co-regulate with other people? These
are all self-binding strategies that we
can use so that we're not relying on
willpower alone because if we wait to
rely on our willpower alone,
we will not make it. Especially in this
world of overwhelming overabundance,
there are just too many temptations.
Willpower is an exhaustable resource,
meaning that it doesn't last forever. It
eventually runs out. So, we've got to
actually create barriers between
ourselves and our drug of choice. so
that we can have a little bit more time.
And that little bit more time, that
slowing things down is sometimes just
enough to allow ourselves to surf the
cravings and get through them without
actually using.
>> Is it possible to become addicted to
good things, too?
>> So, when I use the term addiction, I'm
really talking about a disease process,
a form of mental illness. It's a very
common term that's used in everyday life
and people don't always use it in that
way. But when I'm using it, I I'm really
talking about the problem of compulsive
overconumption despite harm to self and
or others. And it's important to
distinguish addiction from something
like a habit, which I don't consider to
be, you know, an addiction or even a bad
habit, right? Doesn't meet threshold
criteria for addiction. And also it's
important just to distinguish all of
that from a passion, something that we
really invest in and that we love to do,
but that's helpful for ourselves and or
other people is not consistently causing
harm.
>> Are there any daily practices like a
morning ritual that you would advise
someone to consider if they were trying
to set themselves up to kick a habit or
to kick an addiction?
>> So, I recommend doing the hard things
first. Um, a shorthand way of saying
that is to start your day with pain.
Meaning, for example,
do the hard things when you first get up
as part of your morning routine, like
exercise,
>> like exercise, make your bed,
>> um, eat breakfast, brush your teeth,
plan your day, plan what you're going to
do if you haven't done it already, and
do all of those things before, for
example, you have your morning cup of
Joe or before you touch a single screen
or digital device. Why? because those
are reinforcers that are so powerful
that we're all vulnerable to having our
goals and desires be hijacked by them.
So really important to take the time in
the morning to set up a good morning
routine before you expose your brain to
these incredibly reinforcing substances.
>> I wasn't clear on why wasn't clear on
the why I would do why I would go to the
gym early or why I do hard things first
before I get into Tik Tok or social
media. If you do intoxicants first,
right? If you expose your brain first
thing in the morning to things that are
incredibly pleasurable, you have nowhere
to go from there. And in fact, if any if
anywhere, you're going to have a
comedown from that. And then you're
going to be starting from a place of
compromise where then doing the hard
things is is even harder. Whereas, if
you start with the hard things, you will
potentially get rewards from having done
those hard things, right? and also feel
a sense of competence, right? And and
accomplishment that then allows for you
to move through your day in a way that's
better if you just start with something
that's incredibly pleasurable.
>> If I am getting ready to kick a habit, a
big one, a big, you know, one that's
really hung around for a long time, is
there something I should do in
preparation to plan for my dopamine fast
or for kicking that habit? because you I
know you said, you know, from day one it
will take about four weeks to start to
to feel the cravings diminish, but is
there something I should be doing before
I even start those four weeks?
>> Yeah. So, I strongly recommend preparing
for the dopamine fast in advance. And
the things to do are first figure out
what is your drug of choice. That is to
say, what is the thing that you're
consuming too much and too often such
that you regret it later
>> or the thing that's leading to obvious
negative consequences or the thing that
just has opportunity costs associated
with it. That is to say, um you're
spending so much time consuming this
drug that you're not doing other things,
other hobbies, investing in other things
that are meaningful to you like your
primary relationships. So, that's very
important to just figure that out first.
And I usually recommend something called
the timeline followback method. That's
where you start today and you count
backwards for every day of the week.
What did you consume in terms of your
drug of choice? Um how much and how
often. So really looking at quantity and
frequency and then adding that up over
those seven days.
And the reason that's important is
because we can really lose track of how
we're consuming our drug of choice when
we're chasing dopamine. We're very bad
self-observers. So, just to give a a
personal example, um I had gotten into
this habit of watching YouTube after
work as a way to relax,
>> especially on my long clinic days when I
was more tired. And I thought it was
just that I was watching for maybe half
an hour a couple times a week. And then
my daughter, a teenager, came up to me
and she said, "Mom, you're always
watching YouTube now." And I said, "No,
I'm not." And I was really kind of
insulted because in my mind it was not
very much. I thought, "Geez, can I relax
every once in a while and watch some
YouTube?" But then after she left me, I
thought to myself, well, okay, how much
have I been watching right now? And it
turned out, oh, I've been watching for
an hour and a half. And then I thought
about the day before that, oh, it was
probably two hours. And the day before
that, it was probably about the same.
And over the course of a whole week, it
was probably about 14 hours of YouTube,
which is a whole day. A whole day,
right? And so,
>> what were you watching?
>> Gosh, so embarrassing
for I I I got into this jag of watching
Dr. Pimple Popper, which I know is
really weird. You don't even know what
that is, right? Yeah. So, it's people
popping other people's pimples. Oh my
god. [laughter]
>> So bad. So bad.
>> That's not what I expected you to say.
>> Yeah. Right.
>> I thought it was going to be AI, some
psychology things, some science.
>> No. No.
>> People popping other people's pimples.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You don't
>> spent a whole day watching that.
>> Yeah. When I added it up over a week, it
was a whole day of watching Dr. Mimple
Popper. [laughter]
>> I don't know any founder who started
their business because they like doing
admin. But whether you like it or not,
it's a huge part of running a business
successfully. And it's something that
can quickly become all-consuming,
confusing, and honestly, a real tax
because, you know, it's taking your
attention away from the most important
work. And that's why our sponsor,
Intuate QuickBooks, helps my team
streamline a lot of their admin. I asked
my team about it, and they said it saves
them around 12 hours a month. 78% of
Intuit QuickBooks users say it's made
running their business significantly
easier. An Intuit QuickBooks new AI
agent works with you to streamline all
of your workflows. They sync with all of
the tools that you currently use. They
automate things that slow the wheel in
the process of your business. They look
after invoicing, payments, financial
analysis, all of it in one place. But
what is great is that it's not just AI.
There's still human support on hand if
you need it. Intuit QuickBooks has
evolved into a platform that scales with
growing businesses. So if you want help
getting out of the weeds, out of admin,
just search for Intuit QuickBooks now.
Right, guys. Going to go get Steve. The
guest is here. Ready?
>> Come in.
>> Oh my god. Steve,
>> what are you doing?
>> This is uh the Bontage face mask. It's
good for blemishes, wrinkles, uh clears
up the skin. It's red light. Have you
not used it before?
>> No.
>> Tried this before. It's um it's really
really good. It's shines red light on
your face, which helps increase and
boost collagen production. Actually
found it out because of the misses. Seen
her wearing it. She terrified me a
couple of nights in a row. Um, I thought
it was to scare people with, but
actually it's really, really good for
your skin. So, they are a sponsor of the
podcast and uh I've been using it every
day for about a year and a half now.
>> Wow.
>> Well, Steve, I'm glowing. It's great.
>> Yes. And Bon Charge ships worldwide with
easy returns and a year-long warranty on
all of their products. So, visit
boncharge.com/diary
for 25% off on any product sitewide. But
you have to order through that link.
That's bondcharge.com/diary
with code [clears throat] diary.
And on on um page 64 of your workbook of
Dopamine Nation, there's this really
interesting um image here which I I'll
throw up on the screen. It shows a brain
and that's as far as I'm going to go
with my me explaining it. Over to you.
[laughter]
>> Okay. So, this is uh these are human
brain imaging studies. This is adapted
from the work of Nora Vulov and her
colleagues. She's the head of the
National Institute of Drug Abuse, an
amazing researcher and scientist, and
she looked at dopamine transmission
levels in the reward pathways of healthy
control subjects on the left versus
people addicted to a variety of
substances on the right, cocaine, meth,
alcohol, etc.
Basically what she found was in the in
the brains of healthy control subjects
there was plenty of dopamine
transmission as represented here by red
or the darker color
in the brains of people who had been
using these substances in an addictive
way meaning heavily and chronically
there was almost no dopamine
transmission in the nucleus encumbent.
In other words, these individuals are in
a chronic dopamine deficit state. They
have below
normal levels of dopamine transmission.
>> Isn't this just kind of the story of how
the human body works where if you give
it too much of something through an
external source, an exogenous source.
So, if you're taking lots of dopamine
via Tik Tok or from porn or from
alcohol, your brain goes, "Well, if
you've got enough of that, then I won't
make any."
>> You know what? You just summed it up.
That That's exactly right. That
essentially too much of anything is bad.
And that our brain which is designed to
return to homeostasis, homeostasis being
a finite number of physiologic states
that the organism must maintain in order
to survive.
>> Is this the case with things like
melatonin as well? Because there's
people are struggling a lot with sleep,
so they're taking a lot of these
melatonin pills. I don't know. Someone
offered me one one time and I remember
thinking, well, if I start taking this,
then isn't my body going to stop making
it and then I'm going to become
dependent on these [__] pills?
>> So, that is the potential with I think
any exogenous source that we that we
use, right?
Anything that we ingest,
our brains and our bodies will want to
adapt to bring us back to whatever our
baseline is. But the the difference
between addictive substances and
behaviors um and non-addictive ones is
that the the release of dopamine and the
reward pathway is so fast and so strong
that this process of neuro adaptation is
equally strong to bring us back down to
baseline.
Because we we do know that there are
medications that people can take for
very long periods of time and actually
not develop tolerance to them, right?
They can continue to work for for them
over the long period of time. We don't
actually know exactly why it is that
some some people develop tolerance and
and not others. And again, it probably
has to do with the amount, you know, the
dose, exactly how it's working on the
brain. But in general, things that are
highly reinforcing, our brain tends to
adapt to them over time.
>> And testosterone is another one people
often talk about where if you take
external testosterone consistently, your
brain will decrease the natural
production of it. And as a result,
natural testosterone shuts down and
testicular size can shrink. But then if
you stop the TRT, the external
testosterone abruptly, your natural
system might take a long time to
recover. And in some cases, it may never
fully recover back to baseline. I think
this is just like a really important
principle for
>> Yeah.
>> drugs, chemicals. Yes.
>> Or messing with the natural balance of
one's body.
>> Yes. Yes. Exactly. And by the way, Nora
Volkoff and her team did a follow-up
study in individuals who abstained from
methamphetamine for 14 months and then
rescanned their brain and showed that
they had restored healthy levels of
dopamine transmission. It took 14 months
in in those individuals who had been
very addicted to methamphetamine, which
I think is also an important message
here. You know, for individuals
struggling with severe addiction, it's
not like four weeks of abstinence is
suddenly going to, you know, make your
brain better. But what I have found in
clinical care is that that's typically
enough time to begin to see the light at
the end of the tunnel. And that indeed
there's enough
restoration of sort of baseline levels
of
joy or capacity to experience reward
that that people can begin to have hope
to get out of that state of craving.
What is the most interesting because you
know you've been exposed to so much
research on the subject of dopamine and
human behavior.
Is there a particular study that always
stands in your mind as being the most
informative or interesting or surprising
that you've encountered?
>> A study that um that keeps coming back
to me. There are a couple. I mean
there's so many but
>> give me them.
>> Okay. So, if you put a rat in a cage
with a rat trapped in a plastic bottle,
that rat will that rat will work very
hard to free the trapped rat.
But if you then allow that rat to
administer, self-administer heroin,
it will not work to free the trapped
rat. To me, that's really powerful
because it it suggests how
addictive substances like opioids, which
heroin is,
can usurp our desire for human
connection,
and essentially become the object of
attachment. And we often talk about
loneliness and isolation as a risk
factor for addiction, which it
absolutely is. But the reverse is also
true. That getting addicted will cause
us to isolate and be lonely. We will
stop caring about other people. So for
me that's that's a really a really
powerful you know kind of experiment
that I think does map on to human
behavior. something really interesting
this on just a day-to-day level which
mean which in your head I was trying to
relate that to my my own life and
thinking you know if I get really
addicted to my screens and my devices
when my partner needs me
>> right
>> I might be so distracted and so
connected to the thing that's giving me
dopamine upstairs in my bedroom like my
laptop or whatever on my work that I
might completely miss her call for help
and I kind of you know I hate to say it
but sometimes I do feel like maybe that
is I've been guilty of that.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> You know, I've been so, dare I say the
word, addicted to
my work or devices or whatever that, you
know, sometimes I'm not present with
meeting other people's needs.
>> Absolutely. And you know, that certainly
happened to me with my addiction to
romance novels, right? We I stopped
paying as much attention to my kids and
to my husband. We um went on a
vacation with another family at the
beach and instead of joining folks on
the beach, I stayed in the room and read
romance novels. We went to a neighbor's
party and I actually found a room in the
house and read romance novels instead of
socializing and didn't even think that
was weird, even though that's obviously
really strange. So it is this kind of
coming to overvalue our drug of choice
and undervalue other
more meaningful um good things in our
lives.
>> Could you theoretically say it's making
the world less empathetic or less
sympathetic or less
what's the adjective of like of actually
being there for other people? I guess
connection in relationships. It's it's
it's hurting our ability to connect to
others and be have empathy for them and
be there for them because we're
possessed by
the thing giving us the most dopamine.
>> Yeah. I would go even further and say
not only is
is it making us less empathetic, but
it's actually making us sociopathic.
In other words, when people are in their
addiction, they can deviate from their
moral compass um because they so
overvalue this drug of choice that they
lose sight of their their own values.
And we see this um with kids who become
addicted to video games or or social
media. They stop participating in family
life. They stop treating their parents
with respect. They stop participating in
household chores. Um they become
essentially antisocial.
And when they get off of digital media
and they go through that terrible
withdrawal period, it get all that gets
worse and and even they will endorse
things like wanting to hurt their
parents or wanting to hurt themselves.
But if they can just go long enough and
abstain uh you know from digital media,
they will they will come out the the
other side. And parents will talk about
getting their child back, you know, and
getting back, you know, this person that
that they recognize as their child. So,
I think this is this is really
important. When people are in their
addiction, they can look very
personality disordered, very
narcissistic, very borderline,
very sociopathic.
And when they get into recovery, that's
not who they are at all. And they can
they can really become themselves again.
I read about a really extreme case where
that drug I believe it's called pramoxyl
>> pramipaxel
>> pramipaxel which is a dopamine agonist.
>> Yes.
>> Which essentially means I guess the
molecule is the same shape as dopamine.
So it kind of the brain treats it like
dopamine.
>> Yes.
>> And these people were given it for
twitchy leg or something.
>> Right.
>> And then they like so many of them lost
their minds. They became obsessed with
like compulsive impulsive behaviors. And
I was reading about one particular lady.
She would leave the house in the early
hours of the morning when she was taking
this drug, which kind of is the same as
dopamine.
>> And she would wear see-through tops.
This was like a normal woman who
otherwise [clears throat] had a normal
life.
>> And go to very dangerous places to try
and have sex with strangers.
>> And it was because she was her brain was
um
full of this this drug which simulated
dopamine. But there's so many examples.
There was one from Australia where a
woman was taking this drug which sim
which which is like dopamine in terms of
it molecular structure. And she would
sit on these slot machines until she
soiled herself and urinated on herself.
She ended up losing her house, losing
her car, losing her marriage just
because they'd given her this drug which
is the same as dopamine. And it made me
realize that that dopamine isn't
necessarily the the drug of um reward,
but more of like
wanting and impulse and desire. Is that
an accurate assessment of it? Like it
makes you desire things. And there was
other examples when I was reading about
it where people would a guy would take
this drug and
started engaging in homosexual
sex acts whereas otherwise he'd been in
a heterosexual relationship.
>> It was all very confusing but it says
something to me about what dopamine is
actually doing.
>> Yeah. I mean, I think, you know, when
we're talking about
addictive substances and behaviors,
the initial response of the brain is to
release a lot of dopamine all at once in
the reward pathway. But with repeated
use,
dopamine, dopamine release gets weaker
and shorter in duration and eventually
it leads to this dopamine deficit state.
And that's often what we call wanting
but not liking. So, and George Coupe has
called this dysphoria driven relapse
where now they're using, you know, not
to feel good but just to stop feeling
bad and feel normal. So, in that sense,
I dopamine is
I mean is part of pleasure. I mean that
that's it's that's not you know
it's not its sole function. But when it
comes to addictive substances and
behaviors, the initial encounter has to
feel good or be reinforcing or get
someone out of pain, right? It has to
solve that problem. But again, the issue
is that with repeated use, it stops
doing that, but there's still that
motivation to reuse again and again. And
when we're thinking about like exogenous
or external sources of just giving
someone dopamine, that's not going to
work to treat that dopamine deficit
state because it's going to bind
indiscriminately to dopamine receptors
throughout the brain. And the brain will
respond with that same process of neuro
adaptation where it's downregulating you
know dopamine receptors which is again
what is setting us up for this
repeated addictive pattern.
>> Is there any other studies that were
shocking to you and that have always
stayed with you? Another really
interesting study is if you um expose a
rat to a single injection of cocaine and
then slice open its brain, you'll see
this arborization of dopamine releasing
neurons in the reward pathway. So that
means a proliferation of uh neurons that
release dopamine, a kind of growth of
the dopamine forest, so to speak. But by
the way, you'll see that same
arborization or growth of dopamine
releasing neurons if you put a rat in a
complex maze, right? Which is to say a
maze where they can explore and find
different things and have challenges. If
you then cut that rat's brain open,
you'll see that same arborization of
dopamine. So in other words, learning is
highly rewarding and dopamine is
released in response to novelty and new
things and new challenges. But if you
then take that rat and pre-treat it with
methamphetamine and put it in the maze
and then look at its brain, you don't
see any additional arborization beyond
what you got with methamphetamine.
And the interpretation there is that
drugs actually may usurp or steal our
ability to learn, right? because they've
again this idea of sort of they've taken
over. It's such a powerful dominant
stimulus that there's no additional
growth or neuroplasticity in response to
something like learning a maze.
>> And does that mean that when that rat
was in the maze the first time and its
brain was full of dopamine, dopamine was
therefore playing a role in helping it
to learn?
>> No. So the learning itself
actually caused proliferate. So, so
dopamine is is responsive not just to
rewards, not just to pleasurable things,
but it's actually responsive to pain,
it's responsive to novelty. So, it's
responsive to any emotionally powerful
experience. So when you put a rat in a
maze and it explores that maze, that's
an enriching,
exciting experience for the rat because
we are creatures who are evolved to seek
and explore and learn new territory and
then move on and do the same thing.
>> Ah, so you could say then that if I'm
taking an addictive substance like
cocaine, I'm going to be much less
likely to go out and explore the world.
>> Yes. Exactly. Or if you do explore the
world, you'll there you capacity to be
rewarded by that experience will will
decrease or will not be there.
>> So I'm less likely to do it then.
>> Right. Yes. Yeah.
>> I mean this highlights a bit more of a
fundamental link around like motivation.
Like if you're addicted to something, if
you're addicted to pornography, your
ability to like get up and go out and
get a job might be diminished.
>> Absolutely. I mean what what happens
with addiction is that we have a
narrowing of our focus on our drug of
choice such that that's the only thing
that's reinforcing for us and other
things lose their rewarding potential
and eventually they fall away altogether
and we're spending all of our time
getting our drug using our drug trying
to get more as we come down. Can I talk
about another experiment which I think
is interesting. Another really
interesting experiment is the rat park
experiment. And this is the work of
Bruce Alexander. And he essentially
said, well, if you put a rat in a cage
with nothing else to do but press her
press a lever for cocaine, of course,
that's what they're going to do because
there's nothing else happening. But what
if you put a rat in a very enriched
environment with a lever to press
cocaine, but also lots of other things
to do, other rats, uh, shoots in mazes,
little, you know, sawdust balls. What he
discovered was that the rat is much less
likely to press that lever as often
because it has other reinforcing things
to do. And I think that that was really
groundbreaking
in the sense that
it is true that addictive substances and
behaviors work on the brain in this very
predictable way that's so reinforcing
that even if you have a great life, you
can get addicted. But it's also true
that our environment really matters. And
if we're living in an impoverished
environment like that single rat in a
cage with nothing else to do, we're much
more likely to get addicted than if we
live in this really enriched environment
where we have lots of other sources of
reward, lots of other uh sources of
dopamine. And based on that work, there
was something then called the Icelandic
experiment. And this is quite some years
ago now, but Iceland had a significant
youth drug problem. And the way that
they decided to intervene was to build a
lot of gymnasiums and emphasize youth
sports. And as we've talked about,
exercise and sports are a healthy way in
general, if you don't overdo it, to get
dopamine because you're paying for it up
front, right? You're working for it. And
um Iceland saw a significant reduction
in their youth drug use problem after
the implementation of this youth sports
system. So I think that's a nice way to
that's it's a nice example of how an
animal model can actually provide some
kind of fundamental
frame to understand what's happening in
the brain that can be then translated to
a real world implementation.
>> Radical honesty. Okay. So, um, radical
honesty is something that I learned
about from my patients and it was the
observation that my patients who were
able to get into sustained recovery from
severe addictions had learned that they
couldn't lie.
And it wasn't just that they couldn't
lie about their drug use. They couldn't
lie about anything. So they couldn't lie
about why they were five minutes late
for a meeting. They couldn't lie about
why they couldn't go to a party. They
had to tell the truth in all things
large and small.
And to me that was fascinating. And it
was an idea that I started to play with
and experiment with in my own life. And
I realized that telling the truth is
actually really hard because we're all
prone to little lies to kind of cover up
our shortcomings. Um, you know, these
are things that we hardly even notice.
They're also like lies of exaggeration
to make ourselves more interesting, lies
of flattery where we tell other people
how great they are, even though we don't
necessarily believe that. So, all these
little lies that we tell, um, I think
even if you're not struggling with
addiction, these lies can erode our
lives, make our lives more impoverished.
Um and I think you know it's working
through many different mechanisms you so
the question then becomes why is
truthtelling or radical honesty
protective and I think it's working
across many different levels but one of
the important levels that it's working
across is simple awareness
because when we're lying to other people
we're also actually lying to ourselves.
Um, and when we're lying to ourselves,
we actually don't know what we're doing,
right? And when it comes to our
consumptive behaviors, on the one hand,
you know, I may know that I'm watching
too many videos on on the same at the
same time really not know that I'm doing
that, right? So, but when I tell another
human being exactly what I'm consuming,
how much, and how often, then it becomes
real to me in a way that it's not. when
it's sort of pinging around in the dark
recesses of my my own mind. So that
awareness is really important because we
can't change our behaviors unless we're
aware um of what we're doing.
The other aspect of that that's really
important that I've learned over many
years of being a psychiatrist is that
the way that people tell their
autobiographical narrative is really
important and that there are healthy
ways we can tell our stories and also
not so healthy ways. And what I have
observed is that when when people are
telling stories in which they're always
the victim of other people or
circumstance,
I know pretty well that they're not
going to get into recovery. But if they
start telling a story that acknowledges
their own contribution to their problem,
whatever it is, including the problem of
addiction, then I'm pretty confident
that we're headed in a good direction.
And that's really interesting because
what it means is that our
autobiographical narratives provide a
template for our lives. They're not just
a way to organize past experience. They
actually provide a roadmap for the
future. And if we're telling self
stories that are
a more accurate representation of what's
actually happening in our lives, we will
have more information from which to make
better decisions going forward.
>> So victimhood keeps you stuck.
>> It keeps you stuck because it decreases
your awareness of what is actually
happening.
And it is our awareness of what is
actually happening that allows us to
have the data we need to make better
informed decisions.
>> Does it also in to some level rob you of
responsibility?
>> Absolutely. Because although addiction
is characterized by a loss of agency
around our consumptive behaviors, we
still have some degree of agency always,
even if it's only enough to reach out
and ask for help. And as people get into
sustained recovery, they have a lot more
agency, right? As they get out of that
vortex of addiction. And it is that
agency that that we must employ to make
the next best decision so that our lives
will be this accumulation of small good
decisions that then lead to good weeks
and week good months and good years.
>> I think that point is so important. this
this idea of agency which essentially
means like having control in in my life.
Feeling like I have a sense of control
in my life. Is that like a definition of
agency? How would you define it?
>> I I wouldn't define it so much as
control because there are so many things
that happen in our lives that are out of
our control.
But when we reduce our decision down to
today, you know, and what I can do
today, the things that I actually can
control today, then yes, recapturing our
agency around the things that we
actually have control over is really
really is really important for recovery.
>> The definition I've pulled up here is
agency means the capacity to act
intentionally and make choices that
influence outcomes. And um it does tend
to be the case from my observations that
people that have a high degree of
agency, i.e. they believe they have uh
capacity to act intentionally and make
choices that influence their outcomes
seem to be the most successful and on
average seem to be a little bit more
happy.
>> I think that sense of competence and and
agency is definitely one that makes us
feel good. The danger a little bit when
we're dealing with severe addiction is
that in our addictions, we often tell
ourselves that we have agency and
control when we really don't.
>> And so that can be part and parcel of
denial, which means that getting into
recovery is often about admitting that
we may have agency in many aspects of
our lives, but when it comes to our
addictive behavior, we've lost some
degree of agency.
>> And that's part of the 12step program,
right? Yeah, that is a really important
part of the 12step program is that admit
admitting that our lives have become
unmanageable
uh when it comes to our drug of choice.
>> The 12step program being Alcoholics
Anonymous, very famous program to to
help you through an addiction. Is there
anything else we should have talked
about that we haven't? you know, when it
comes to
New Year's resolutions and and wanting
to change habits,
sometimes these sort of all or nothing
thinking
can
be something that's not helpful for
people, right? this idea that okay I'm
gonna abstain from this and I'm going to
go a month and you know I'm going to do
it and then they find that they're not
able to do it and there's then a lot of
shame and self self-inccrimination.
So you know that that approach is is not
for everybody and for some a better
approach is sort of self-compassion
and a goal of moderation. Yeah,
moderation is an interesting one because
most of us will just be like, I'm going
to go to the gym every day or I'm I'm
going to have no sugar ever again or no,
I'm going to abstain from alcohol
completely, but
>> maybe moderation for some of these
things is more realistic and therefore
more effective and important.
>> Yeah. And we find that moderation
typically is more successful if period
if people have abstained for long enough
to kind of reset reward pathways. But,
you know, even just reducing use can be
a laudable goal.
We have a closing tradition on this
podcast where the last guest leaves a
question for the next guest not knowing
who they're leaving it for. The question
is, what's the one thing the universe
keeps putting in front of you and what
is the thing that it keeps you learning?
>> Um, so right now in my life, the thing
that the universe keeps putting in front
of me is the importance of letting my
kids go and have their own life
experience.
um rather than
trying to cling to the relationships
that we had before as they were growing
up, which for me was a really joyful
time. But I'm recognizing that they need
to be in the world on their own and I
need to figure out what I'm going to do
um as an empty neester. So that's not
that deep, but that is what I'm
struggling with right now.
And how is that struggle manifesting?
Well,
I mean, if I'm being totally honest, um,
social media and digital media and those
commu modes of communication
have probably made this worse for me
because, for example, the find my
iPhone, I keep checking where my kids
are and thinking that in a way um, we're
connected because I know where they are,
but we're not. and also they don't
particularly like it that I'm checking
where they are. So there's this kind of
weird phenomenon of wanting connection
and through text and other technology
trying to recreate that connection. And
yet in some ways I think I might be
better off and they might be better off
if we didn't actually text and I didn't
actually track where they are.
>> Does that make sense?
>> It does. And I I was I think I was
laughing cuz I just had this picture of
you sat there with like one screen is
tracking them and the other one is like
watching the pimples being popped.
>> Yes.
>> Both are comparable, right? These these
are both sort of related to sort of
habits or behaviors that are self
soothing but ultimately not not good for
me and you know not good for other
people. Do you think much about how
other behaviors that we take part in
like sleep um and meditation
um and our nutrition have a big impact
on our ability to kick the bad habit to
start a new one?
>> Oh, absolutely. Um there's a great
acronym from Alcoholics Anonymous called
HALT. Hungry, angry, lonely, tired. You
know, when we're feeling those things,
we're more likely to crave our drug of
choice. Um, so importantly, we've really
got to make sure we take care of
ourselves physically and emotionally so
that we're as well as we can be so that
we don't um get into that state of
wanting to escape or self soothe or numb
ourselves. And by the way, that's true
in the work that we do as mental health
care providers, right? We have to really
come to patients or clients with our
needs met, um, our cup full so that we
can be fully present for for our
patients.
>> Dr. Anna Lemi, thank you so much for
coming back on the show. It was
incredible the conversation we had last
time and it was so unbelievably
wellreceived. Um, it's done probably
closer to 10 million views across all
platforms now. Um, five just over 5
million views on YouTube alone. And I
can't begin to imagine all the the
people that you've had a profound impact
on by making these complicated things
accessible. And I know we we simplify
this to a point that it might be quite
>> difficult for because I I know the
science is much more complicated, but
just having a simple mental model for me
is has helped me so much since we last
spoke understand what's going on inside
my body and inside my brain
>> in a simplified way. And that's exactly
what was reflected by the millions of
people that watched last time. your book
is the the book to read and your
workbook as well is a crit critical to
read alongside it um on this subject if
people want to learn more and get an
even deeper understanding of everything
we've talked about today and also if
they're struggling with addictions
because these book books provide a
really I'd say nuanced um empathetic and
shame avoiding set of ideas and
solutions to some of the things that
hold us hostage in our lives whether
it's opioids or technology or other
behaviors is that we know at some level
are getting in the way of what we'd
rather be doing and who we'd rather
become. So, thank you so much for your
work. It's such an important work and I
know you're working on another book
which we didn't talk about this time,
but when that book does come out, I'd
love to have you back on to talk about
all the things in that cuz I um little
Bernie told me the subject matter and
it's absolutely fascinating. So, I'm so
excited.
>> Thank you so much. [music]
>> This is something that I've made for
you. I've realized that the direio
audience are strivvers. Whether it's in
business or health, we all have big
goals that we want to accomplish. And
one of the things I've learned is that
when you aim at the big big goal, it can
feel incredibly psychologically
uncomfortable because it's kind of like
being stood at the foot of Mount Everest
and looking upwards. The way to
accomplish your goals is by breaking
them down into tiny small steps. And we
call this in our team the 1%. And
actually this philosophy is highly
responsible for much of our success
here. So what we've done so that you at
home can accomplish any big goal that
you have is we've made these 1% diaries
and we released these last year and they
all sold out. So I asked my team over
and over again to bring the diaries back
but also to introduce some new colors
and to make some minor tweaks to the
diary. So now we have a better range for
you. So, if you have a big goal in mind
and you need a framework and a process
and some motivation, then I highly
recommend you get one of these diaries
before they all sell out once again. And
you can get yours now at the diary.com
where you can get 20% off our Black
Friday bundle. And if you want the link,
the link is in the description below.
[music]
Heat. Heat. N.
[singing]